Well, good afternoon everyone.
NOTE CONF
So you will probably be happy to hear that we
are nearing the end of CNF and other logical manipulations,
NOTE CONF
But we're going to spend one more week on ways
of looking at formula, finding satisfying formula, converting formulae into
NOTE CONF
form which into different forms, which makes things easier.
So we're becoming slowly more computational.
NOTE CONF
We're actually going to do a little bit of computation
on formulae today.
NOTE CONF
That is I will do a little bit of computation
and you will do some later.
NOTE CONF
And then we will move next week into thinking much
more directly about computation and simple models of computation, namely
NOTE CONF
finite automata.
So we have a couple of lectures about satisfiability and
NOTE CONF
the problem of finding a satisfiable assignment through a formula,
Given that we know it's we have algorithms that work
NOTE CONF
on CNCF.
So last week we did DHFL and you've worked a
NOTE CONF
bit with DHFL.
You did the Sudoku problem, which I hope was interesting
NOTE CONF
to some of you.
Um, how many people actually did the timing stuff in
NOTE CONF
the last question?
Okay, but disappointing wasn't that hard.
NOTE CONF
So it was an easy mark if you did it.
Um, if you those of you who did it will
NOTE CONF
have learned that the time required to find a satisfying
assignment or not depends quite a lot on what constraints
NOTE CONF
there are.
And the the take home message of the exercise was
NOTE CONF
actually that adding unnecessary constraints can significantly decrease the time
that's described in the book, so you'll see more about
NOTE CONF
that if you choose to read the book or if
you discuss in tutorials.
NOTE CONF
But the other thing we've talked a little bit about
last time was whether we can convert a formula to
NOTE CONF
CNF in the first place efficiently, and we realised that
it might blow up exponentially, but we found that sometimes
NOTE CONF
we could convert it to a formula which was not
quite the same formula, but was equivalently satisfiable.
NOTE CONF
So last time we looked at logic gates and we
did a similar kind of thing to formulae.
NOTE CONF
And we showed that if you take formula and chuck
in a bunch of extra variables, you could get a
NOTE CONF
formula which is satisfiable if and only if the original
formula is.
NOTE CONF
And today we're first going to take a little sidetrack
into algebra.
NOTE CONF
Um, you were just doing.
Some of you were just doing linear algebra a moment
NOTE CONF
ago, but we're going to be doing Boolean algebra.
And after doing a bit of algebra, we're going to
NOTE CONF
go back to manipulating formulae and talk about a very
clever little transformation, which is essentially the logic gate stuff
NOTE CONF
we did applied to formulae.
And then depending on how things go, we will talk
NOTE CONF
tomorrow, maybe more about session and then about a slightly
different problem which is counting assignments.
NOTE CONF
I'll say more about that when we get there.
Um, so who are this week's people?
NOTE CONF
Um, Henry Shaffer was someone who made a bunch of
contributions to Boolean algebra, which I'm going to talk about
NOTE CONF
now.
And Gregory Session, who, of course, was Grigori but preferred
NOTE CONF
to be known as Gregory in English.
Um, is was a guy who did a bunch of
NOTE CONF
things in logic, and he's best known for what I'm
going to talk about today and tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
He looks a cheerful kind of guy.
I never met him, but I believe he was a
NOTE CONF
cheerful kind of guy.
This guy looks scary.
NOTE CONF
I don't know whether he was scary.
So let me start by recapping the very basic stuff
NOTE CONF
that we've been doing from the beginning.
We've been talking about boolean operators.
NOTE CONF
We've been talking about Boolean logic and Boolean operators.
And we have not.
NOTE CONF
And an oar, which we took to be the basic
things.
NOTE CONF
You've now seen implication and by implication several times.
And you've also seen in various places exclusive or A
NOTE CONF
or B, but not both, which perhaps raises the question
how many binary boolean operators are there?
NOTE CONF
This is something you can work out easily by thinking
about truth tables.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Anybody further back?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sorry I couldn't.
NOTE CONF
Quite fair.
Was that for.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Well, we got one, two.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
123, four, five different operators here.
NOTE CONF
So.
What size is the truth table for a binary operator?
NOTE CONF
Two by two.
What possible values can there be in each of the
NOTE CONF
four cells?
Two.
NOTE CONF
So therefore there are.
Of the 16 binary operators, some of which are not
NOTE CONF
very interesting.
Um, so those of you who are electronically inclined will
NOTE CONF
be familiar or become familiar with a couple of others
which are not and and not or.
NOTE CONF
But the full list looks like this.
There's the constant true operator.
NOTE CONF
You might wonder, is this a binary operator?
Well, we can define a binary operator, which is just
NOTE CONF
constantly true.
It's not terribly useful, but it might have some uses
NOTE CONF
some time really.
There's a false which we could make binary if we
NOTE CONF
wanted to.
There's a not operator which is unary normally.
NOTE CONF
And then we have a bunch of binary operators.
These are the traditional ones and or implies implied by
NOTE CONF
if an XOR.
So these are symmetrical Nand and nor.
NOTE CONF
So these are again symmetrical.
Um so do we want to use all these operators.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Hardware designers work with Nand.
NOTE CONF
And because it's easy to write to make gates on
chips that use Nand and Nor, XOR is useful often
NOTE CONF
for thinking about things.
So you might want to manipulate them.
NOTE CONF
What have we been doing with boolean operators?
We've been doing sequent calculus, amongst other things, and you've
NOTE CONF
had at least two questions asking you to do this.
So back in the CL tutorial.
NOTE CONF
There was a question saying give sequent calculus rules for
implies, and I think you were asked for it again
NOTE CONF
in an FP tutorial, so should perhaps have been absorbed
by now.
NOTE CONF
And the idea here was that, well, we could always
deal with immigration by expanding it, because we know that
NOTE CONF
A implies B is the same as B or not
A, so we can always just replace the implication by
NOTE CONF
the all and the not.
But when we're actually doing logic, it's convenient to have
NOTE CONF
these derived rules that allow us to manipulate it directly.
And then you also asked if you did the question
NOTE CONF
to give rules for, by implication, equality if and only
if they're a useful operator in maths.
NOTE CONF
Because ultimately many mathematical theorems are about proving a long
chain of equivalences.
NOTE CONF
Um, very boring exercise.
If you've done a bunch of stuff in Haskell on
NOTE CONF
this already, some of it you did in optional or
semi optional questions.
NOTE CONF
If you really have nothing better to do with your
time, and I'm sure you do, then you could work
NOTE CONF
out how to extend this to all possible operators.
Um, just as a side note here, this rule is
NOTE CONF
the one that says what we can do when we
see an implication.
NOTE CONF
We're trying to prove it.
What does it say?
NOTE CONF
It says basically, if we're trying to prove that A
implies B, then we try to prove that A entails
NOTE CONF
B.
And if we forget about the junk, the gamma and
NOTE CONF
the delta, then it looks like this.
And this is the encapsulation of what I was saying
NOTE CONF
several weeks ago about the same thing at different levels.
So implication is something happening at the level of formally
NOTE CONF
entailment is something happening at the level of universes and
formally.
NOTE CONF
And this rule says that essentially they're the same thing.
So that's what we've been doing so far.
NOTE CONF
We've been doing proofs, but doing proofs is not the
only way to do things.
NOTE CONF
So you are familiar with various forms of algebraic manipulation.
I hope everybody has been subjected to solving simultaneous equations
NOTE CONF
in school.
Write simultaneous linear equations.
NOTE CONF
Anybody think they've never had to solve a simultaneous equation?
Good.
NOTE CONF
Who can't actually remember whether even even what I'm talking
about?
NOTE CONF
I can't say that I've had much use for them
since school, but never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um, and also in school, you almost certainly solve quadratic
equations in various ways.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's the formula, there's trying to work out what
the factors are.
NOTE CONF
And I was very happy once I learned the formula,
because then I never had to remember how to factorise
NOTE CONF
stuff.
Um, if you are doing CSS and maths, you will
NOTE CONF
meet various other forms of algebra.
If you did further maths at school, then you may
NOTE CONF
have met some kinds of other algebra such as group
group algebras.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm going to do now is introduce you
to some formal algebra about Boolean operators.
NOTE CONF
So what is algebra?
About algebra is about writing equations between things and manipulating
NOTE CONF
the equations in order to get other equations, which hopefully
eventually show you what you want.
NOTE CONF
And algebra has many useful properties.
It's a tool that one can use in several ways,
NOTE CONF
so it's a good way to define things.
Many things in mathematics are defined by writing down the
NOTE CONF
equations that they satisfy.
And once we've got that, then we can use algebra
NOTE CONF
to solve statements about some problem.
When we define things algebraically, we typically say we have
NOTE CONF
a bunch of things and they satisfy some properties.
So these are properties of Boolean operators that you are,
NOTE CONF
I hope familiar with.
You probably take them for granted.
NOTE CONF
We discussed them briefly at the start of the course.
So and and or are both associative.
NOTE CONF
If we write a or b or C it doesn't
matter where we put the brackets.
NOTE CONF
Similarly for and so in mathematics we also have.
The plus is associative times is associative minus of course
NOTE CONF
is not.
Um we have commutativity a or b is the same
NOTE CONF
as b or a.
And similarly with and and again if we think about
NOTE CONF
numbers that's true of plus and times as well.
This is something that we don't see in numbers so
NOTE CONF
much.
This is a useful fact.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes if we know A or we know A and
B, then we can forget about the B, because if
NOTE CONF
we if we might know A and we might know
A and B, then we know A, but we don't
NOTE CONF
necessarily know B.
So these two things allow you to prove the same
NOTE CONF
things or they have the same truth values.
Whenever you see an equation like this you can think
NOTE CONF
of it in two ways.
You could say, can I write a sequence calculus rule
NOTE CONF
that proof that takes this into that and vice versa?
Or you can say, do they have the same truth
NOTE CONF
tables?
And either will demonstrate that the equation is true.
NOTE CONF
But when we do algebra, we write down equations which
we assert to be true.
NOTE CONF
And then we see what else we can define about
them.
NOTE CONF
This is another property that we use a lot without
thinking about it.
NOTE CONF
If we have a and we call it with false,
that's the same as a.
NOTE CONF
In other words, false is the identity operator for or
in the same way that zero is the identity for
NOTE CONF
plus true is the identity operator for and in the
same way that one is the identity operator for times.
NOTE CONF
So far this all looks moderately familiar.
The most dramatic way in which logic differs from arithmetic
NOTE CONF
is that we have distributive distributive both ways.
So when we do arithmetic, we can distribute times over
NOTE CONF
plus, but not the other way round, but in logic
or distributes over and and and distributes over all.
NOTE CONF
And you have, I hope, been using these without thinking
about them too hard all the time.
NOTE CONF
And finally, we have excluded middle in various forms.
Either A or not.
NOTE CONF
A is true, and it's not possible for A and
not A to be true.
NOTE CONF
So this is actually a complete characterisation of what the
Boolean operators are.
NOTE CONF
This tells you everything that there is to know about
the Boolean operators, and anything else we might want to
NOTE CONF
know about them can be deduced from these equations.
This is quite a lot of axioms one, 23456789 ten
NOTE CONF
1112.
Do you think you could reduce the number of axioms
NOTE CONF
to talk to completely pin down everything?
That must be true about Boolean operators.
NOTE CONF
It's.
Not terribly obvious, is it?
NOTE CONF
Looking at it.
So these things, all these axioms seem to do different
NOTE CONF
things, and they all tell us useful things.
Um, actually, there is one equation which captures all of
NOTE CONF
these.
I do not understand it.
NOTE CONF
I spent some time reading it and trying to understand
it, but I never quite completed the task.
NOTE CONF
If you are feeling really courageous, you can go and
read the paper and see if you can follow the
NOTE CONF
argument.
I guess in principle I could follow it, but I
NOTE CONF
just don't have the enthusiasm to do so.
This was actually the culmination of quite a long programme
NOTE CONF
of research.
Seeing how few axioms do we need?
NOTE CONF
How few equations do we need to completely describe the
Boolean operators?
NOTE CONF
It was reduced and reduced and reduced.
I don't have the date for this.
NOTE CONF
I forget it's maybe in the 50s or 60s.
Um.
NOTE CONF
But when we have these equations, they let us derive
other useful equations.
NOTE CONF
And some of those are things that we've used a
lot.
NOTE CONF
So when we were doing proofs, we use double negation
to not cancel out.
NOTE CONF
Um, the not of a one is a zero, and
the not of a zero is a one.
NOTE CONF
We use this all the time.
So this is a simplified form of the absorption property.
NOTE CONF
If we have a or a that's just the same
as a and likewise a and a is the same
NOTE CONF
as a and the one that we studied a lot,
the Morgan laws, they've been around for a long time.
NOTE CONF
You might ask why did we not define the Morgan
as one of our basic operators?
NOTE CONF
Well, you can always make a choice of which of
these equations you want to define as basic.
NOTE CONF
This particular bunch is enough to give you everything.
You could remove some of these and replace it by
NOTE CONF
the Morgan if you wanted.
But it's a matter of taste.
NOTE CONF
Um, why am I doing this?
Because I want to talk about proof.
NOTE CONF
And this is probably the first really serious algebraic proof
you have seen, depending on what you're doing in maths.
NOTE CONF
Have you done any actual algebraic proofs in maths courses
yet?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, with linear algebra stuff.
So about dot products and vector products okay.
NOTE CONF
So you've seen the rules for manipulating dot and vector
products which I can't remember.
NOTE CONF
But again though distributive laws there and anti commutativity for
vector product and so on and so on.
NOTE CONF
So we can do the same kind of thing with
boolean operators although they're easier than vector products.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I thought I would show you one example,
but before I go on to doing a proof, there's
NOTE CONF
a lot of stuff here.
Anybody want me to talk any more about any of
NOTE CONF
these equations?
If I give you a random equation and say, prove
NOTE CONF
it using these things as your starting assumptions, do you
have any idea how to start?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Well, in that case, you're doing better than I am
NOTE CONF
because I find this kind of stuff quite hard.
And usually I work backwards from what I'm trying to
NOTE CONF
prove and try to see if I can get the
equations.
NOTE CONF
Um, other people will find this kind of thing very
easy, but computers find it really easy because they can
NOTE CONF
do a lot of brute force searching.
So actually, if you want to do proofs using equations
NOTE CONF
these days.
Asking a computer do it to do it is easier.
NOTE CONF
But I will do one non-trivial proof just to show
you what happens when I say I will do it.
NOTE CONF
I don't mean I will create it in front of
you because that would go horribly wrong.
NOTE CONF
But I will show you the proof.
Um, so I said that we can prove anything about
NOTE CONF
Boolean algebra from these 12 axioms.
So here's an example of deriving De Morgan's law.
NOTE CONF
We've already derived to Morgan's law in several ways.
We looked at truth tables, and we also did a
NOTE CONF
sequent calculus proof of De Morgan's law.
So now we're trying to do it again algebraically.
NOTE CONF
This should give us confidence that algebra does things.
So basically what we're trying to do is use the
NOTE CONF
equations on the previous slide to get from this to
this, and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
Um, Turns out to be a lot harder than you
might think.
NOTE CONF
And it's helpful to prove a little lemma first.
So if x or y is equal to one.
NOTE CONF
So if x or y is true and x and
y is false.
NOTE CONF
So in other words we're in the exclusive or case
we have that one of x or y is true
NOTE CONF
but not both.
Then either x is equal to.
NOTE CONF
Then x is equal to not y and y is
equal to not x.
NOTE CONF
Because we're in the exclusive war case, we have one
0 or 0 one.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I'm going to prove that lemma.
I'm going to leave that to you.
NOTE CONF
Um, no, I am going to prove it.
So here's the proof of that.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's look at not y.
So I'm trying to look at not y and show
NOTE CONF
that it's the same as x.
So not y is equal to one and not y.
NOTE CONF
That's true by the identity operation.
So the identity rule was back here said that a
NOTE CONF
or one sorry a and one equals a.
I've also used commutativity there because this said that a
NOTE CONF
and one equals a.
So I need commutativity to get one and a equals
NOTE CONF
a.
So I've turned y into one and not why does
NOTE CONF
that anything strike you as a bit odd about that.
Different from the way we proceeded in sequence calculus.
NOTE CONF
So when I did a proof in sequence calculus, I
started with a sequence for the bottom.
NOTE CONF
And then I tried to prove it, and I told
you that it was completely automatic.
NOTE CONF
I didn't have to think.
Why didn't I have to think?
NOTE CONF
This is breaking down because I was always simplifying the
formula.
NOTE CONF
What have I done here?
I've taken something nice and easy, like not y, and
NOTE CONF
I've turned it into something more complicated.
Like one and not.
NOTE CONF
Why?
And for me, this is what makes algebraic proofs difficult.
NOTE CONF
You often have to make something more complicated in order
to get to where you're going.
NOTE CONF
This is going to get dramatically more complicated.
So I've got one and not y.
NOTE CONF
Now I'm going to plug in one of my assumptions.
So I have the assumption that x or y is
NOTE CONF
equal to one.
So I can replace that one by x or y.
NOTE CONF
So I've got not y is equal to x or
y and not y, which is even more complicated.
NOTE CONF
And it's quite unclear where we're going here.
Now I can apply the distributive law and make it
NOTE CONF
even more complicated and distribute not why over this so
not why and these two things is the or of
NOTE CONF
these two things and with not why X and not
why or why are not why.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I've expanded a one letter formula into a
four letter formula, which doesn't sound like a win.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm going to simplify a little bit.
I know that y and not y is false.
NOTE CONF
We can't have something being true and false at the
same time.
NOTE CONF
So I can place that by zero.
Then I can use my assumption again.
NOTE CONF
If I see zero, I have an assumption about zero
that says it's the same about x and y.
NOTE CONF
So if I have zero, I can see x and
y.
NOTE CONF
Now at this point I can see I've got an
x there and an x there.
NOTE CONF
So I can use distributive again and pull it out,
pull the x out of that and give me X
NOTE CONF
and not Y or why?
Now I have the complement rule again.
NOTE CONF
Now I have not why or why?
Which is always one because of the law of the
NOTE CONF
excluded middle.
So that's the same as x and one.
NOTE CONF
And that's the same as x by the identity rule.
So it's taken me 6 or 7 steps.
NOTE CONF
How many.
Seven steps.
NOTE CONF
Making things more complicated to show that not y is
equal to x given these assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Do you think you could do that?
NOTE CONF
Um, I mean, I could do it.
I did do it.
NOTE CONF
It took me quite a while because I nobly tried
to do it myself before looking at the answer.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is, as I said, this is why
computer algebra systems are great, because they can churn through
NOTE CONF
this stuff and try lots of possibilities so you don't
have to think so much.
NOTE CONF
But so far, all I've done is prove a lemma.
What I'm actually trying to do is prove this.
NOTE CONF
So why have I gone to all the trouble of
proving this complicated lemma?
NOTE CONF
Now I'm going to start looking like a mathematician.
So this looked like a computer, right?
NOTE CONF
I was doing stuff that is easy to implement, and
now I'm starting to writing lots of English.
NOTE CONF
And there's a word in this text which you should
always be very suspicious of.
NOTE CONF
What's the word in this paragraph that should raise red
flags easily?
NOTE CONF
There are words that mathematicians like to use easily, as
one obviously is another.
NOTE CONF
Whenever I see you write, obviously I'm going to look
very hard, okay, because sometimes obvious things are not obvious.
NOTE CONF
Um, Are we doing for time?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Another word is trivial, and I think I have to
repeat my favourite story about triviality.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I didn't actually see this, so this is a second
NOTE CONF
hand story, but I did maths at Cambridge and the
graph theory lecturer, there was a guy called Bella Bash.
NOTE CONF
Bola bash is very, very smart.
Well, mathematically, he's extremely smart.
NOTE CONF
Politically, he's not so smart.
Um, he doesn't have a terribly high tolerance for people
NOTE CONF
who are not as smart as him.
So being taught by him was a scary experience.
NOTE CONF
But he threw excellent parties at the end of the
course with fantastic food.
NOTE CONF
So there were definite benefits.
And in those days, the way lectures in maths happened
NOTE CONF
was that the lecturer wrote on the board and we
sat there copying down what was written on the board.
NOTE CONF
The really clever people could understand it in real time,
and the rest of us had to go back and
NOTE CONF
understand it later.
This is why I don't do this to you.
NOTE CONF
I hated trying to understand it in real time because
I couldn't write fast enough.
NOTE CONF
But the story goes that Bob bash was writing down
a theorem and as is the custom at some point,
NOTE CONF
he said, and this step is trivial.
And he had a strong Hungarian accent, so it was
NOTE CONF
this is trivial and a very brave student in the
audience, said Professor Bola Bash.
NOTE CONF
Why is it trivial?
And Paul Bash turned round, Looked at the board back.
NOTE CONF
Looked at the board.
Walked up and down.
NOTE CONF
Walked out of the door.
Walked up and down the corridor for five minutes.
NOTE CONF
Came back and said I was right.
It is trivial but never explained why.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to do this.
I see there's a misprint there which has survived three
NOTE CONF
years.
So what does my proof actually say?
NOTE CONF
It says I'm trying to prove that not A or
B is not A, am not b.
NOTE CONF
So given that I have the lemma here, it would
be enough to show that these two things are sum
NOTE CONF
of all to one, they or to one, and they
end to nought.
NOTE CONF
Because the lemma tells me that I have two things
that and that, or to one and to zero, then
NOTE CONF
one is the negation of the other.
so that it would be the negation of that.
NOTE CONF
And then I claim that these follow easily by distributive
complement, associativity and commutativity.
NOTE CONF
And when I say easily, all I mean is if
you write down a long chain of things, you will
NOTE CONF
just follow your nose and you will get to the
end without making things radically more complicated.
NOTE CONF
So you should probably try to do the second one.
So I've done the first one here with a couple
NOTE CONF
of omissions which you should fill in, but try to
do the second one if you want a bit of
NOTE CONF
practice in manipulating proofs as you go further, depending on
what courses you do, you might need to do more
NOTE CONF
algebraic proofs, especially if you do maths.
Okay, so that's Boolean algebra.
NOTE CONF
We introduce it mainly as a demonstration of a different
way of thinking about things and a way of thinking
NOTE CONF
about things that is useful, particularly in using doing automated
proofs of things.
NOTE CONF
What about other operators?
I gave you a bunch of rules for if and
NOTE CONF
only if.
Just as we did with sequent calculus, we can make
NOTE CONF
derived equations in algebra instead of sequence calculus.
So a if and only if be an equation that
NOTE CONF
describes that is that a if and only if b
is the same as A implies b and b implies
NOTE CONF
a.
All that's doing is writing the definition down as an
NOTE CONF
equation.
Similarly, with implication, we just write the definition of the
NOTE CONF
definition down as an implication, and that captures it.
Now we've been talking about CNCF.
NOTE CONF
So what might we use Boolean algebra for.
Well we might use equations to convert a formula into
NOTE CONF
conjunctive normal form.
Um, but how do we know to do this?
NOTE CONF
Because I showed you a nasty proof, which made things
more complicated in order to get to something simple at
NOTE CONF
the end.
And that's not what we want to do.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out that if we want to use
equations to convert things to conjunctive normal form, then it's
NOTE CONF
actually straightforward.
You can follow your nose.
NOTE CONF
We don't have to do difficult proofs.
Um, and all we do is do stuff which you're
NOTE CONF
doing in FP anyway.
Get rid of implications.
NOTE CONF
So get rid of BI implications using these two things
that we've defined.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you did the negation normal form exercise, then
you know that it's straightforward to push negations inwards.
NOTE CONF
So then what we end up with is a formula
with lots of ands and ors and all the negations
NOTE CONF
on the inside applied to propositional variables.
Then we use distributive property and we just keep pushing
NOTE CONF
or inside.
And until all the ORS are inside all the ands.
NOTE CONF
And then we have conjunctive normal form.
And you did that.
NOTE CONF
Or at least most of you did it.
Um, now I really suggest if you didn't do the
NOTE CONF
optional parts, go back and have a look at them
because they're quite constructive.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
If you try to do this stuff by hand, it
NOTE CONF
is very, very boring.
Um, as you may have noticed, I'm easily bored.
NOTE CONF
If you look at the textbook, then there are worked
manual examples.
NOTE CONF
It would be sadistic of me to make you go
through work manual examples.
NOTE CONF
So you do what any sensible person is does and
Doesn't make the computer do it instead.
NOTE CONF
So where does circuits come in?
Said we were going to do stuff with circuits.
NOTE CONF
Circuits are not really a digression, so this looks as
if I'm changing into a completely different subject.
NOTE CONF
But actually I'm doing the same subject, just in a
different form.
NOTE CONF
If you're a circuit designer, you draw diagrams which have
gates.
NOTE CONF
Gates are transistors with two inputs or one input.
This is an and gate.
NOTE CONF
When the two inputs are positive high voltage, the output
is high voltage.
NOTE CONF
This is an Or gate when one input.
When at least one input is high voltage, the output
NOTE CONF
is high voltage.
Um, this is a Not gate.
NOTE CONF
When the input is high, the output is low and
so on and so on and so on.
NOTE CONF
And back in the olden days, before this was done
by computers, people do little diagrams and use these symbols
NOTE CONF
and you work through and draw diagrams connecting gates to
other gates.
NOTE CONF
So this is the output of one gate being fed
into another.
NOTE CONF
So this thing here is the circuit for A and
b or not c and B feeds into an Or
NOTE CONF
gate.
C feeds into a knot which feeds into the Or.
NOTE CONF
How many of you did this in school?
Anybody.
NOTE CONF
Quite a few.
Okay good.
NOTE CONF
Was that in computer science or in electronics?
Computer science.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, that's quite fun.
NOTE CONF
It's even more fun.
Did you actually build circuits on Breadboards and fun, which
NOTE CONF
it's making little lights light up.
It's more fun when you're younger than you usually get
NOTE CONF
to do it in school, but it can still be
fun even in later life.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Now, there's one way in which circuits are radically different
NOTE CONF
from formulae, and this is something that we're now going
to notice and then exploit.
NOTE CONF
If I take a circuit, I can use the same
output more than once, because if I'm building a circuit,
NOTE CONF
I can put wires between things.
And when you build on breadboards and the like, then
NOTE CONF
you can plug wires anywhere you like.
So here's a little circuit.
NOTE CONF
It's got an A and B and then it's got
the not C but also it's got a bunch of
NOTE CONF
other stuff going on.
If you look at what this circuit is trying to
NOTE CONF
do as a formula, what it's doing is A or
B is being negated there and then it's fed into
NOTE CONF
an Or and the rest of that.
Or is the negation.
NOTE CONF
That's the negation.
So that's the not sign of an or of not
NOTE CONF
c and a and b because I've got a wire
here which is leading this output into this gate again.
NOTE CONF
Now in real circuits you have to worry about how
many gates you can feed one particular output into, because
NOTE CONF
in actual circuits, these there are voltages on the output
of these things.
NOTE CONF
And the current it can draw may be quite small.
So there are usually strict limits.
NOTE CONF
Um, anybody remember what the CMOs limit is five ish
I don't know.
NOTE CONF
So you can't duplicate arbitrary but you can arbitrarily.
But you can feed the output of a circuit into
NOTE CONF
at least 2 or 3 other gates.
Informally, we don't have a way to do that.
NOTE CONF
When I wrote down the formula, I wrote down A
or B twice, even though this gate only occurs once.
NOTE CONF
Can I do the same trick using formulae that I've
just done in the circuit?
NOTE CONF
And yes, we can, because I can define a new
variable.
NOTE CONF
And I actually think it's more helpful to think of
this as if it were a piece of Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So think about the red stuff as being a temporary
variable called v.
NOTE CONF
So this formula here is not v or not v
or not c where v is equal to a and
NOTE CONF
b okay.
That's how you would write it in Haskell if you
NOTE CONF
turned them logical symbols into Haskell operators.
Of course Haskell where is not pure logic, but what
NOTE CONF
is the Haskell where if you think about it in
logic, what it says is we have this formula with
NOTE CONF
an extra variable v in it.
And by the way, v is exactly the same as
NOTE CONF
a and b.
So this and v if and only if a and
NOTE CONF
b is just a logical way of writing down where
v equals a and b.
NOTE CONF
So what have I done?
What I've done is avoided reuse of an and operator.
NOTE CONF
Here I had to write the and operator twice.
Here I've written it just once and I've used the
NOTE CONF
variable.
Of course the formula has got a bit longer, but
NOTE CONF
that may not be too much of a problem if
we've saved space.
NOTE CONF
If we can save lots of ands that the cost
of introducing a few variables, that makes the formula shorter.
NOTE CONF
Now what I'm really trying to do in this whole
exercise that we've been working on for 3 or 4
NOTE CONF
weeks now is work out whether a formula has an
a satisfying assignment.
NOTE CONF
Can I make it true or is it a tautology
or is it a contradiction?
NOTE CONF
Is this formula the same formula as this formula?
That doesn't require any thought.
NOTE CONF
Shouldn't require any thought.
Is it the same formula?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is it a logically equivalent formula?
Um, this formula has a V in it.
NOTE CONF
This formula doesn't have a V in it.
The value of V might be true or false.
NOTE CONF
So how can the formulas possibly be logically equivalent?
How can a formula about two variables be equivalent to
NOTE CONF
a formula about three variables?
And the by implication, is tying them together.
NOTE CONF
But if you look at this formula, you still have
to write down the truth table with three variables in
NOTE CONF
it.
So we can't really say that the formulae are exactly
NOTE CONF
equal.
It's not the case that this formula is true if
NOTE CONF
and only if this formula is true, because this has
a v in it that we have to worry about,
NOTE CONF
and this one doesn't.
What is true is that if one of them can
NOTE CONF
be made true, the other can be made true.
That's where the fact that V is actually completely determined
NOTE CONF
by A and B comes in.
If I know that I have values of A and
NOTE CONF
B that make this true, then I know that I
have values of a, b, and v that make this
NOTE CONF
true.
The value of v is completely determined by a and
NOTE CONF
b because I've written down a definition.
It's still there, but it's determined.
NOTE CONF
So that's the the key point.
What we've got here is two formulae that or equi
NOTE CONF
satisfiable.
If this one can be made true, then this one
NOTE CONF
can be made true and vice versa.
So it looks like a bit of a cheat, but
NOTE CONF
it turns out to be a very useful treat.
Cheat.
NOTE CONF
So let me see what I do.
What I've done here is just do it for one
NOTE CONF
variable here.
This is quite a complicated formula.
NOTE CONF
So there are several other outputs.
We could do it for all of them.
NOTE CONF
It gets a bit messy.
So I have to introduce additional variables v w x
NOTE CONF
y z r r is quite important because it's the
output of the whole gate.
NOTE CONF
And I can just write down this bunch of things
and say is r satisfiable?
NOTE CONF
What's r or is that what's x.
Is that what's v?
NOTE CONF
Is that what's z.
um, z is that and so on.
NOTE CONF
And then I try to find values of r xy,
the w z a b that make all this true.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm trying to do is find an assignment
of these variables where R is true, where the output
NOTE CONF
of the formula is true.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Now, I could now move into the actual work, but
I think probably we should save that for tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
And now I've introduced a lot of stuff.
So I've introduced algebra equation, manipulating equation and manipulations.
NOTE CONF
And this idea that we can use ideas from circuits
to reduce the number of times we use stuff in
NOTE CONF
logic to allow us to reuse the same formula more
than once in logic.
NOTE CONF
So are there any questions at this point about anything
we've done so far today?
NOTE CONF
What are the characteristics of a formula that are going
to make doing this a sensible thing?
NOTE CONF
Because if I look at the difference between this thing
and this thing, especially when I've added all these in,
NOTE CONF
I seem to be making life a bit more complicated.
I'm adding stuff.
NOTE CONF
Under what circumstances might it be a big win to
do what I'm doing here?
NOTE CONF
When you're computer.
When you're a computer, well, I mean, even so, we
NOTE CONF
want our computer to be inefficient.
But what what kind of formula would actually get significantly
NOTE CONF
shorter when I do this kind of thing.
Suppose I have a formula with 10,000 clauses in it.
NOTE CONF
What property of the 10,000 or 10,000 sub formulae?
What property of the sub formulae would make this quite
NOTE CONF
a sensible thing to do?
Repetition.
NOTE CONF
So if I have a formula with 10,000 sub formulae
in it, and 5000 of the sub formulae happened to
NOTE CONF
be the same, then it's a big win.
If I only write that formula down once with a
NOTE CONF
bunch of variables, instead of writing the perhaps quite long
sub formula down 5000 times.
NOTE CONF
Um, why does this happen?
Because any formula that is 10,000 some formerly long, is
NOTE CONF
going to be generated automatically by something, and automatic generations
from complex problems tend to have quite a lot of
NOTE CONF
repetition in them.
Um, so in practice, this thing that looks as if
NOTE CONF
it might get longer turns out to make things shorter
a lot of the time.
NOTE CONF
And one of the cases in which you get a
lot of repetition is actually when you convert formulae into
NOTE CONF
conjunctive normal form.
What's the last stage of the algebraic manipulation I said
NOTE CONF
before?
So we do the basic stuff of getting rid of
NOTE CONF
the derived operators.
We push negation inwards.
NOTE CONF
That doesn't change the difficulty at all.
And then we use distributive property to push or inside.
NOTE CONF
And that tends to blow up the formula.
Because if I do a, um or b and c
NOTE CONF
that turns into a or B and A or C,
so I end up generating lots of little formulae, and
NOTE CONF
by the time I've pushed an or through an an,
through an author and an to an author, and, and
NOTE CONF
I get an enormous blow up of formulae, many of
which look pretty much the same.
NOTE CONF
So that's the kind of example where this trick with
circuits can seriously reduce the overall complexity of the formulae.
NOTE CONF
So tomorrow I will define this formally applied directly to
formulae.
NOTE CONF
So we'll take the circuit idea, define it on formulae.
And I will very courageously do a live demonstration of
NOTE CONF
this stuff working in my own Haskell programming.
And I will show you a simple example.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll show you an example which demonstrates how
actually it's a serious win in many cases.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll go on to talk about something completely
different and slightly weird if there's time.
NOTE CONF
So please have a look through this stuff before tomorrow
and at the start of tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
If you have any clarification questions, make sure we cover
it at the beginning because you'll need to know this
NOTE CONF
to understand what happens next.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One minute earlier.
Let's finish.
NOTE CONF
This.